Let me go back to those statements again. Dean
Kyle, I worked with him after that. He not only was
Ambassador to Guatemala after he retired there,
but he served on the Farm Credit Board in Houston,
and I served on the board there during the 50s. So we
learned to know each other, and I always had the
highest respect for him. I believe Kyle Field was
named for Dean Kyle. He was chairman of the
Athletic Committee. But an incidentalist
nephew, Sid Kyle, was one of the star basketball
players that lately made a big contribution to
A&M. But anyway, there's fine, fine. The other is
Dr. Bridges P. Lee, back in this statement, that
remember people are important. I learned that so
much. my later life being a county agent, working
with people in the cooperation. But Dr. Virgil Lee
went down there and headed up Production Credit
Corporation in Houston. I believe he's still
living. He's retired. Very active and high up in
rosary clubs and things like that. But those are
the two men, the statements I can remember the
best. But there's others, mind you. They were just
so good. In fact, I don't remember having any
teacher down there that I didn't have the highest
regard for, and I did get something from them. A
couple of people I've talked to had
had some problems with the chemistry department.
Well, I didn't. In fact, I'd taken chemistry in
high school, and I liked chemistry. So to me, it was
not a bad course, Tom. Well, they didn't say that
they didn't like the people. It's just it was a hard
course to pass. Well, to me, it was easy. And I know
each one has pumped out a lot.
What attitudes did the students have towards the
administration, that is, both the academic
administration of the president and the military
administration of the bull? I think it was very,
very good. In fact, I can't keep from thinking, the
first president when I was there, Dr. Bazell, when
I was there incidentally about my junior year,
went to Oklahoma University. But I've always
considered him as one of the outstanding
presidents. He had the, well, just everything it
would take to be an outstanding president. Then
Dr. Walton had followed. He came up through the
Extension Service. was good. And, of course, the
commander, what did we call him? Generally, I
believe they called him the Bull. Commandant.
Commandant. Well, to my knowledge, we didn't have
any trouble when I was there. That reminds me of a
story you want me to tell you? Sure. Well, about the
commandant, military. In my senior year, it was
Austin Hall there. Me and my roommate, Earl McCoy,
the captain. We roomed on the second floor. One
morning began to be a lot of liquid come down
through the ceiling. So we got as scared as
everything. And it turned out that somebody was
making a home brew up there. Well, so had me. And I
know the captain of the company, Earl McCoy,
didn't know anything about it. But he got that
cleaned up and cleaned out up there pretty
quickly. And to my knowledge, he combed that and
everything. And we would have inspectors come
through the dormitory pretty often. That's the
nearest we had to booze or whiskey in my four years
at A&M was that up there. And I didn't even know it
was there. And we didn't have the picture. or a
pound down there to catch it. That took some pretty
enterprising students. Yes, it did. To make up a
batch of homebrew, and I imagine you had a fairly
frequent inspection of your rooms, didn't you? We
did, an inspection of the room. That's one thing
the cadet corps taught you. Make up your bed, keep
your shoes shined, and keep your room orderly and
all. And you know, as old as I am, and my wife will
take care of all these years, and then this and that
will be made, I still like the idea of when a person
gets up making up his bed, mind you, don't do it.
Well, in my four years of college, even though it
was not a military school, that was a common
practice of both my roommate and I. We made up our
beds when we got up.
One of the things that I think is of interest about
Texas A&M is the number of traditions which have
been going on, such things as the bonfire, the
senior boots, and things of that nature. Can you
remember any things of this nature that were
started while you were there? No. The bonfire was
going on when I was there. Of course, it's a fresh
one. And as upperclassmen, we got out and got the
poles, timber, and so forth to make. We enjoyed
that. Another thing we enjoyed was yell practice.
We would do it then up in front of the Y. We'd get out
there every so many evenings a week and have yell
practice, particularly during the football
season, some basketball. But those things, I
don't recall offhand without thinking, any
tradition that was started or something new that
was started when I was there. One thing that I
think, one thing I've observed in the three years
I've been there is the week before the SMU game all
the fish have to make spurs and make them out of coat
hangers and coke bottle tops. Did the fish have to
make the spurs while you were there? No, in my time
we didn't. You didn't do that. Well, let's see, I
believe, what, the senior boots started about the
time you were there, didn't they? Senior boots was
on when I was there. They were already wearing
them. You could wear boots if you could afford
them, or you could wear leather leggings. There
were one or two of them. But only seniors could wear
the leather leggings? Yes, that's right. The
other students wore what? They wore your wrap
leggings. Uh-huh. Just wrap you around. Let me
tell you a story on that, you know. Every other
year, we would go to Austin for the Texas game. So
we'd go over the train, walk up Congress Avenue,
which is uphill. So we'd get off and on. We'd have
our guns. We'd walk and on, keep a step. There's
probably a little strain. our legs would swell.
Those leggings, you know, they really were tight
when we got up there at the Capitol building. I'll
never forget that. You just couldn't hardly walk.
They kind of cut off the circulation when your legs
would begin to swell, wouldn't they?
Did you have a muster any of the time that you were
there? I mean, we know that they started a muster of
some sort in April 21st in 1903, but... You know, if
we did, I don't remember. Recently, I tinned the
last muster down there, but to my knowledge,
that's the only muster I ever tinned unless, of
course, we had it out there in front of the wire or
something like that. Mm-hmm. But I don't recall
it. It could have, but I forget. I'm sure the death
that started in 1903, I'm sure we had no time there.
But
I just don't happen to recall. I know I didn't take
an active part in it, other than be present. I was
always present. If I lost a milking cow, I was
present. You mentioned earlier that you ate your
breakfast fairly near the table that the athletes
had for their meals. Were there any other
privileges that the athletes enjoyed? No, not
that I know of. At that time, I don't recall them
being in a separate dormitory. If they were, I
don't remember. I don't know what hall it was or
what not, but I do know But for breakfast, they
would have a special table over there and would
have their breakfast served to them there in the
kitchen, side of the kitchen.
But I don't remember the athletes having it.
Frankly, I don't even remember if they having
scholarships. They could have. I wouldn't have
known anything. So they had to attend the regular
drills?
They may have been excused from some of them. I
expect they were. Probably if they were
practicing football at the same time as drills.
Yes, I'm sure they've been excused. Were there
ever any girls in any of the classes you attended?
No, sirree. There was no girls on that campus. When
the girls came there, it was on a special occasion.
That time, TWU, Texas Women's University of
Denton, they'd come down for football games or
special occasions or something like that. But to
my knowledge, they was not a girl, they was not a
lady, even a wife of a student. We had a few students
who were not in the cadet corps, living off the
campus proper, so to speak. But I never saw a girl in
an A&M class until I went back there a few months ago
and attended the classes down there of Dr.
Snyder's on cooperation. And we had one girl in one
of the classes. Well, I have indications that
there were occasionally girls attending classes
during the regular sessions. Not in my time, but I
sure never saw one on the campus except for the
Space Academy. I think during summer they could
attend pretty regularly. They might do it. I never
did go to summer school. Well, there were no
military activities on in the summers, I think,
but there was some of that. I worked every summer,
yeah. had an indication in looking at your senior
yearbook that you were a distinguished student in
1924. What did one have to do to be a distinguished
student? I don't, frankly I'd forgotten that, but
I'm sure it was because my grades were
high. Well, you were also a member of the Panhandle
Club, which was a regional club. That was. But you
were also the Creaming Cow Club. That was the dairy
club. That was called the Creaming Cow. All the
people who majored in dairy husbandry were
eligible for that. Did that meet monthly, or do you
recall? Well, frankly, I don't recall, but I doubt
they met monthly. Probably on call mostly, but
could have met monthly. I frankly have just
forgotten, but I do remember being a member of it.
At one point you were president, starting with the
yearbook. Yes. Okay, and being on, you were twice
on the dairy judging team as a junior and then on the
national dairy husbandry judging team. How were
the members of those teams selected? They were
selected, you'd get out there and judge cattle,
judge deer cattle, place them, you know, and the
ones that placed them the highest, I mean the most
correct, was on the team. I guess I had some very
good meetings, I have to tell you a story on that.
You don't mind a little comedy, do you? No, not at
all. Well, I'll never forget, we were staying at
the La Salle Hotel in Chicago. There, Professor
Darnell was there, coach, teacher. Well, we
wanted to go to a show right close there, you know. I
guess you'd call it a girly show now. But anyway, we
sort of looked around the hotel for Dr. Professor
Darnell. We couldn't see him. So we got over there,
you know, sitting about the middle, looked right
down in the front seat, and there was Dr. Darnell.
So we never did let him know we were there. Well, I
have an acquaintance who told a story something
similar to that in a very recent year about having
gone to a to another kind of national meeting and
going to a show similar to that. And they were all
the professors from his department at the same
time. So I guess the faculty hadn't changed that
much. No, they hadn't. Back to this selection of
the team, did say the faculty in dairy husbandry
first judge the dairy cattle to see how they would
place them? And then the students who came closest
to that? I'd say the coach judged them. The coach
judged them first. He judged them, and if you
placed them like he placed them, well, you were
right. And then when you went to a show, they had
judges, I would say. And would they then judge them
first, and then the team that placed them closest
to that would be the winning team? As a team and as
individuals. So a team could have the top
individual but not come out too well in the
standings of the team. That's possible.
You graduated then in the spring of 1927.
Did you have a job? It all lightened up by the time
you graduated? Yes, I did. I came out to Seminole in
Gaines County before I graduated. They promised
me or they gave me a job as county agent in Gaines
County. So I was county agent in Gaines County
starting in 27, then about 28. or 29, they added
Terry County to it. Then they separated the two and
I preferred to stay in Terry County because they
had more farmers and they had more kids. I was great
on the 4-H club kids. We still had those country
school hours and we had a 4-H club in every country
school. Both boys and girls was in it. We didn't
have a home demonstration agent in either of those
counties. So I was there, and then I went to
Plainview in 32 as county agent up there, and they
did have a home demonstration agent there. So as
county agent, was it primarily your function to
work with the 4-H club? Yes, it was, and with the
farmers. With the farmers. Did you do somewhat
similar to the county agent's job today,
distribute bulletins? Somewhat, except we had
much fewer bulletins then. We had much fewer. Oh,
specialist.
County agent was county agent then. And we looked
at A&M, and we would have what we called a short
course, I believe we called it down there in the
summer. Terry County would generally have more
down there. We'd drive to post and catch a train
down there and go there. And you know, some of my...
One of them became a state senator in New Mexico.
Another, very good past, became a millionaire in
the grain business. So it's very interesting,
very good. But that's where I go back to Dr. Lee's
statement. People is the most important thing.
So then how long were you county agent there? Five
years. In Plainview? Plainview, I left, went up to
Plainview in September of 30 and went with the Hale
County Deer Association in February of 32. From
then on, I've been with cooperatives.
What cooperatives have you been with? I was with
the Hale County Deer Association, which became
the Plains Cooperative of Kringman, 32 to 38, and
went with the Houston Bank Cooperative as
secretary and vice president from 38 to 43, and
came out here as general manager of the mill out
here from 43 to 71.
The Hales County Dairy Association would be an
organization of dairy farmers. Dairy farmers. In
those days, every farmer milked cow and sold cream
or milk for cheese making. We became the largest
creamer making butter and cheese in several
southwestern states. So the farmers, instead of
selling the cream to a commercial creamery,
established their own creamery. That's right.
And they could produce it. They could make more
money. Make more money. We'd pay dividends. And
then you would also buy your—would the farmers
then buy their feed through the cooperative? At
that time, we didn't have a feed cooperative like
they have now. They would buy their gasoline and
oil from what we call a consumer station just
across the street from Cramer. But I would suppose
at that point most of the dairy farmers raised a
good bit of their own feed, wouldn't they? They
raised most of their own feed and had pastures. But
they did buy some feed, but we had no cooperative
dairy feed like we have now.
The Farm Credit Association in Houston, what was
the function of that organization? Well, it
started with the Federal Land Bank in 1917 making
loans up to twenty years on farm land. Then, about
1923, they added what they called the
Intermediate Credit Bank that would make loans
for short-term loans for production for ranchers
and farmers. Then about 1934, they had the
Cooperative Bank and Production Credit
Association, which was financed out of the
Federal Intermediate Credit Bank. But they had
what they called the Production Credit Corp.
place, which Dr. Lee headed up. But I would say,
without a doubt, in my opinion, The farm credit
system is the greatest
system that's ever been developed in Washington
for the farmer. Because in it, thank goodness,
they required the farmer to buy stock, 5% stock,
out of each dollar loan. So pretty soon, in 53, and
incidentally, I was very active in getting that
through to work. we could remove it from the
Department of Agriculture and make it an
independent government agency where the
borrowers paid all the expenses. And in doing so,
they elected all the directors and operate the
system themselves. Now, it's totally on. Their
bonds that they sell are not guaranteed by the
government at all. So I'd say it's been one of the
greatest examples of the government helping the
people to help themselves.
And then you became general manager of the Plains
Co-op oil mill. In 1943, and it was broke, just like
the Hill County Deer Association was broke. I went
with that creamery plain deal, $100 a month less
than I was getting this county agent. But I liked to
work. I liked to think of it. And so we got things
straightened out. They came out here while the
stock was worth six cents on the dollar. They grew
in the largest oil, cotton seed oil mill in the
world. Working with people. So this is the, the,
the foreign cotton growers then bring their
cotton seed to the mill. Well really, the cotton
growers own the cooperative gin. They bring their
cotton. Seed cotton to the gin is gin. The gin buys
the seed, and the gin was a member of the mill. So the
mill was a federation of cooperative gin. It
started in 1937, but had some bad years, like what
broke. I gather from what I've been able to pick up
that that
was not an uncommon thing for cooperatives to go
broke at it. Well, that was true. They were
underfinanced. Well, I'll tell you a little
story. Now, Hill County Deer Association, when it
started, they couldn't borrow from the banks up
there. They borrowed from the Plainview Savable
Loan Association and agreed to pay them 12.5%
interest. This was 1927. Well, when the
Depression hit, the Plainview Savable Loan
Association went broke. So instead of getting
2.5% of that money back, which they're supposed to
get, they got nothing back. So we were paying 12.5%
interest up there in depression. And we
refinanced, and I make this claim, that I paid the
highest interest that any cooperator's ever
paid, and I paid the lowest. And we refinanced
them. The old federal board, you know, under
President Hoover, I hit the low market one-eighth
of one percent, one-hundredth of what we were
paying. So you refinanced your note and then paid
it off after that? That's right. Then when we
expanded, of course, we borrowed from the Houston
Bank and cooperated. We paid about four percent
there. So the plains mill was in pretty sad shape
when you came to it? Well, it was just on the bottom.
And you saw it? I thought—I was working with the
bank and calling on them, and my two boys were
growing up, our two boys were growing up, so Dennis
and me were both raised out here in Miradace
Middle. So we wanted to come back to Plains. They
gave me a chance at it. So I came back out here and
took it. And I've never regretted it because we had
some dry years, but right after World War began to
develop irrigation out here, and the mill began to
get more seed, and quickly grew into the biggest
oil mill in the world. Okay, so I'll ask this
largely out of my own ignorance. What is the oil
used for? The oil is used as human food. Cotton seed
oil competes with other vegetable oils,
including lard, animal fat. But cotton seed oil
has a few qualities. It's the best solid oil there
is. And as such, it bring a little primal soybean
oil, which is the big vegetable oil, because it's
so much bigger than cottonseed. But cottonseed
oil is used, of course, the protein, the meal, is
used as animal feed, you know. They're trying to
make it into a food now. That is, once you've
crushed the seed and extracted the oil, the solid
matter that's left is made into feed. They're the
meal. The first you get off of is the letters. Then
you have the hose. Then you have your meal. Then you
have your oil. It's about, I don't know, really
about five products. First and second cut
letters, hose, and meal, and oil. So there's not
any of it that's wasted. No, sir. No, sir. And you
know, A&M contributed a lot to that. Mr. A.L. Ward,
before my time down there, just a few years ago, He
proved that cotton seed meal was good cattle and
sheep feed. It had been killing hogs and chickens,
but for ruminants and all, cattle and sheep, it was
good. So I would credit that to the research
station there at Texas A&M and A.O. Washington.
Well, you say they're now doing a good bit of
research there on making human feed out of the
cotton seed. Move it up the ladder. At first it was
fertilizer, and then it was feed. Now it's going to
be food.
Since you've retired from the Plains Cooperative
Mill, you've been associated with the Textile
Research Center at Texas Tech? Yes. Or were you
associated with that before retirement? After
retirement. Enjoyed it through, and I think we got
some things started out there. It's going to be as
revolutionary as this cotton seed mill. What sort
of projects are you doing out there? Well, what we
were doing out there, I think the one that we were
doing everything out there that Texter Mill
wanted to do, but the one that really broke through
was on what we call open-end spinning. It would
handle our low-grade cotton and low-micronaire
cotton make a good yarn, and in turn make a good
fabric, coarse fabric, like denim, twilled, and
things like that. Well, I suppose we need a lot more
denim with the popularity of blue jeans. I believe
it's here to stay. I believe so, too. So then it
makes the low-grade cotton a more profitable
commodity. It has been a discount cotton. It's
going to raise the value. which will raise the
whole economy of the Plains area. And we're
getting textile mills out here, too. I've spent
all my time on that. You're what, trying to
encourage textile mills? Textile mills to come
out here. Both foreign and domestic. You had much
success so far? Yes, so far we have. We've got a
combination here of what we call Feather Fabrics,
a local cap planer. hauling mill called Hinkedi.
Then we have the Japanese people coming in to
Leveland, which will be called Diwaba, America.
And then we have two small textile mills here, one
at Abernathy, one at Loringa, which are trying to
change over to open and spinning. And frankly, the
cooperators are trying to work out a program here
where they can go all the way and produce the fabric
out here of denim. And that's still in the
development stage. But it's coming along. So that
in addition to improving a lot of the cotton
producer, you will also be creating additional
jobs for... Additional jobs. You know, I served as
chairman of the Protection of Rural Development
Commission. You can look at the record. We had an
out-migration of 10 to 25 percent during the 60s of
our population. was far and beyond larger, more
mechanized, more chemicals. Didn't need people.
Some people left. And now we're trying to develop
agri-industries. And Texas will offer us one of
our great opportunities.